GH-38310: [MATLAB] Create the testing guideline document for testing MATLAB interface (#38459)
apache/arrow: matlab/doc/testing_guidelines_for_the_matlab_interface_to_apache_arrow.md

<!---
  Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
  or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
  distributed with this work for additional information
  regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
  to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
  "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
  with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
  software distributed under the License is distributed on an
  "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
  KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
  specific language governing permissions and limitations
  under the License.
-->

# Testing Guidelines for the MATLAB Interface to Apache Arrow  

## Overview  

The goal of this document is to provide helpful guidelines for testing functionality within the [`matlab` directory](https://github.com/apache/arrow/tree/main/matlab) of the [`apache/arrow`](https://github.com/apache/arrow) repository.  

## Prerequisites  

> MATLAB interface has its own tests to ensure its quality. To run those tests locally on your machine, the following software must be installed on your machine:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding tests to the MATLAB interface helps to ensure quality and verify that the software works as intended. To run the MATLAB interface tests, the following software must be installed locally: 
```

1. [MATLAB](https://www.mathworks.com/products/get-matlab.html)
2. [MATLAB Interface to Apache Arrow](https://github.com/mathworks/arrow/tree/main/matlab)

> ## General Guidelines  

Reviewer: Perhaps, we could use a more specific title for this section?

For example:

* Types of Tests
* High-Level and Low-Level Testing
* ...

Reviewer: Thanks! That's a much clearer name!

When adding new tests, it is recommended to, at a minimum, ensure that real-world workflows work as expected.  

> If the change cannot be covered by any use case at the MATLAB interface level, please consider test it at the C++ level. One approach for testing C++ code is to create a Proxy instance manually in MATLAB and call the Proxy's method from a MATLAB test case. Examples can be found in `matlab/test/arrow/tabular/tTabularInternal.m`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a change cannot be easily tested at the MATLAB interface level (e.g. you would like to test the behavior of a C++ `Proxy` method, consider creating a `Proxy` instance manually from a MATLAB test case and calling relevant methods on the `Proxy`.

An example of this approach to testing C++ `Proxy` code can be found in [`matlab/test/arrow/tabular/tTabularInternal.m`](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/main/matlab/test/arrow/tabular/tTabularInternal.m).
```

% To run a single test file
>> runtests(testFileName) % For example: runtests("tArray.m")

% To run all tests recursively under a test directory
>> runtests(testFolderName, IncludeSubfolders = true) % For example: runtests('matlab\test', IncludeSubfolders = true)
```

> To learn more about `runtests`, please check [the documentation of `runtests`](https://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/runtests.html).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn more about `runtests`, please check [the documentation](https://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/runtests.html).  
```

## Writing Tests  

> All tests for the MATLAB interface should use the [MATLAB Class-Based Unit Testing Framework](https://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/class-based-unit-tests.html) (i.e. they should use [`matlab.unittest.TestCase`](https://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/matlab.unittest.testcase-class.html)). Here is a simple example.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All tests for the MATLAB interface should use the [MATLAB Class-Based Unit Testing Framework](https://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/class-based-unit-tests.html) (i.e. they should use [`matlab.unittest.TestCase`](https://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/matlab.unittest.testcase-class.html)). 

Included below is a simple example of a MATLAB test:  
```

### How to Check Code Coverage  

> To generate a MATLAB code coverage report, the [`ReportCoverageFor`](https://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/runtests.html#mw_764c9db7-6823-439f-a77d-7fd25a03d20e) name-value pair argument can be supplied to the [`runtests`](https://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/runtests.html) command. Before generating the code coverage report, remember to add your source file directory to path. Here are the commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To generate a MATLAB code coverage report, the [`ReportCoverageFor`](https://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/runtests.html#mw_764c9db7-6823-439f-a77d-7fd25a03d20e) name-value pair argument can be supplied to the [`runtests`](https://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/runtests.html) command. Before generating the code coverage report, remember to add your source file directory to the [MATLAB Search Path](https://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/matlab_env/what-is-the-matlab-search-path.html).
```

```matlab  

> >> addpath( genpath(<your local arrow/matlab>) ) % Include subdirectories

Reviewer: Could you modify the comment here to explain a bit more directly what `genpath` is doing? I think it isn't immediately clear from the `% Include subdirectories` comment what exactly is happening here.

>> runtests(testFilePath/testFolderPath, 'ReportCoverageFor', sourceFilePath/sourceFolderPath, 'IncludeSubfolders', true/false);  

> ```

Reviewer: Could you please add a note which indicates that `ReportCoverageFor` requires MATLAB R2023b or later?

- **Note**: In certain scenarios, it can make sense to diverge from these rules. For example, if a particular class is very complex and contains a lot of divergent functionality (which we generally try to avoid), we might choose to split the testing into several "focused" test files (e.g. one for testing the class display, one for testing the properties, and one for testing the methods).  

## Continuous Integration (CI) Workflows  

The Apache Arrow project uses [GitHub Actions](https://github.com/features/actions) as its primary [Continuous Integration (CI)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Continuous_integration) platform.  

Creating a pull request that changes code in the MATLAB interface will automatically trigger [MATLAB CI Workflows](https://github.com/apache/arrow/actions/workflows/matlab.yml) to be run. These CI workflows will run all tests located under the `matlab/test` directory.  

Reviewers will generally expect the MATLAB CI Workflows to be passing successfully before they will consider merging a pull request.  

If you are having trouble understanding CI failures, you can always ask a reviewer or another community member for help.  

## Writing Tests  

> Tests for MATLAB interface should use the MATLAB testing framework [`matlab.unittest.TestCase class`](https://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/matlab.unittest.testcase-class.html). Here is a simple example.  

Author: I took Sarah's review feedback. I combined "Writing Tests" and "MATLAB Class-Based Unit Testing Framework".

            % Create a basic MATLAB array.
            matlabArray = ["A" ,"B", "C"];
            % Create an `arrow.array.StringArray` from the MATLAB `string`
            % array by using the `arrow.array` gateway construction function.
            arrowArray = arrow.array(matlabArray);
            % Verify the class of `arrowArray` is `arrow.array.StringArray`.
            testCase.verifyEqual(string(class(arrowArray)), "arrow.array.StringArray");
            % Verify the value of `arrowArray`
            testCase.verifyEqual(arrowArray.toMATLAB,["A";"B";"C"]);
        end
    end
end
```

More test examples can be found in the `matlab/test` directory.  

### Testing Best Practices  

- Use descriptive names for your test cases.
- Focus on testing one software "behavior" in each test case.
- Test with both "expected" and "unexpected" inputs.
- Add a comment at the beginning of each test case which describes what the test case is verifying.
- Treat test code like any other code (i.e. use clear variable names, write helper functions, make use of abstraction, etc.)
- Follow existing patterns when adding new test cases to an existing test class.

## Running Tests Locally   

> To run the MATLAB tests, start MATLAB and then cd to the test directory where test files of interest reside.  Call the `runtests` command to run your tests:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run the MATLAB tests on a local machine, start MATLAB and then `cd` to the directory under `matlab/test` where the test files of interest reside. After changing to the test directory, call the `runtests` command to run your tests:  
```

```matlab
% To run a single test file
>> runtests(testFileName) % For example runtests("tArray.m")

> % To run tests under a test directory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
% To run all tests recursively under a test directory
```

> >> runtests(testFolderName, IncludeSubfolders=true) % For example runtests('matlab\test',IncludeSubfolders=true)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>> runtests(testFolderName, IncludeSubfolders=true) % For example: runtests('matlab\test', IncludeSubfolders=true)
```

```

To learn more about `runtests`, please check [the documentation of `runtests`](https://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/runtests.html).  

## Tips  

> ### Generate MATLAB Code Coverage Report  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Debugging Code Coverage Results
```

> It might happen that caching or other issue causes zero coverage because the test ends up executing some other source file. To avoid such problem, please first set a breakpoint in your source file and run the tests. This step is to make sure that your source file is executed by the tests. After this step, the command `runtests(___, "ReportCoverageFor", ___)` will work well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the `runtests` command with `RepoCoverageFor` reports confusing or incorrect code coverage results, this could be due to caching or other issues. As a workaround, you can try setting a breakpoint in your source file, and then run the tests. This step can be used to verify that your source file is being executed by the tests.
```

> If the `runtests` command with `RepoCoverageFor` reports confusing or incorrect code coverage results, this could be due to caching or other issues. As a workaround, you can try setting a breakpoint in your source file, and then run the tests. This step can be used to verify that your source file is being executed by the tests.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the `runtests` command with `RepoCoverageFor` reports confusing or incorrect code coverage results, this could be due to caching or other issues. As a workaround, you can try setting a breakpoint in your source file, and then re-run the tests. This step can be used to verify that your source file is being executed by the tests.  
```

- One test for one source file. For example, `test/arrow/array/tArray.m` is the test file for `src/matlab/+arrow/+array/Array.m`.  

## When tests are run  

When pushing changes to the `matlab` directory, GitHub Actions is used to automatically trigger tests under `matlab/test` to run. Currently, all tests under `matlab/test` are configured to run. In the future when the run time of running tests becomes a concern, we will consider doing source to test mapping and only triggering related tests to run.  

## How to Write Tests  

Tests for MATLAB interface should use the MATLAB testing framework [`matlab.unittest.TestCase class`](https://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/matlab.unittest.testcase-class.html). Here is a simple example.  

```matlab
classdef tArray < matlab.unittest.TestCase
    methods(Test)
        function InferNullsTrue(testCase)
            matlabArray = [1 2 NaN 3];
            arrowArray = arrow.array(matlabArray, InferNulls=true);
            testCase.verifyEqual(arrowArray.Valid, [true; true; false; true]);
        end
    end
end
```

> More test examples can be found in the directory `matlab/test`.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More test examples can be found in the  `matlab/test` directory.  
```

> ## How to Run Tests Locally on Your Own Machine  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Running Tests Locally
```

> ### Prerequisites  

Reviewer: Maybe we should move this up higher in the document? In my head, it feels like I would typically expect to see prerequisites higher up in documentation.

Also, we can probably remove the mention of the MATLAB testing framework here, since it is mentioned several other times in the document.

Author: I moved the Prerequisites section to the section after Overview, where seems a good position. I rephased the paragraph as "MATLAB interface has its own tests to ensure its quality. To run those tests locally on your machine, the following software must be installed on your machine:".

The tests are written by using MATLAB testing framework [`matlab.unittest.TestCase class`](https://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/matlab.unittest.testcase-class.html). To run the tests on your machine, the following software must be installed on your machine:  

1. [MATLAB](https://www.mathworks.com/products/get-matlab.html)
2. [MATLAB Interface to Apache Arrow](https://github.com/mathworks/arrow/tree/main/matlab)  

### Run tests in MATLAB  

To run the MATLAB tests, start MATLAB and then cd to the test directory where test files of interest reside.  Call the `runtests` command to run your tests:  

```matlab
>> runtests(testFileName) % For example runtests("tArray.m")
```

> To learn more about `runtests`, please check [the document of `runtests`](https://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/runtests.html).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn more about `runtests`, please check [the documentation for `runtests`](https://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/runtests.html).  
```

Author: I updated the example. Now there are two examples: one for running a single test file, and the other is for running tests under a test directory.
